---
layout: letter
title: A is for ActiveRecord
subtitle: Get an overview of the ORM framework that makes Rails Rails. 
permalink: a.html
---

####How to create a blog in 15 steps

My introduction to Rails in 2008 was by way of a forum post called ["HowTo Create a Rails Blog in 15 steps without nested resources + AJAX."](http://railsforum.com/viewtopic.php?id=17671) The author's tutorial is now outdated, but the part on ActiveRecord is still relevant. 

In step 9 of his tutorial, the author presents the following code snippets:

{% highlight ruby %}
    class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
      has_many :comments
    end
{% endhighlight %}
    
...and...

{% highlight ruby %}
    class Comment < ActiveRecord::Base
      belongs_to :post
    end
{% endhighlight %}

These 6 lines of code do a whole lot of nifty things. Let's look at them line by line.

####Inheriting from ActiveRecord::Base

The first line defines a _Post_ class and its relationship to the _ActiveRecord::Base_ class. _Post_ [inherits](/O) from _ActiveRecord::Base_.

So what does Post inherit from ActiveRecord? A whole lot of methods. From them:

-   Post.create
-   Post.find
-   Post.new
-   Post.all
-   Post.first
-   Post.last
-   Post.destroy_all
   
ActiveRecord is designed to save Posts in the "posts" table in your [database](/D) by inferring the name of the table from the name of the class.

####Attribute methods

ActiveRecord finds out the attributes of a Post by reading the "posts" table, and then gives you many more methods related to these attributes. 

In this example, a Post can have a title and a body. So, you can use the following methods to write to a Post:

- post.title = "I'm learning Rails!"
- post.body = "Help!"
 
...and the following methods to read a Post:

- post.title    
    => "I'm learning Rails!"
- post.body    
    => "Help!"

There are many other methods generated by ActiveRecord, such as:

- Post.find_by_title("I'm learning Rails!")
- Post.find_by_body("Help!")
- Post.where(:title => "I'm learning Rails!")
- Post.where(:body => "Help!")
- post.update_attributes(:title => "I'm still learning Rails!") 
- post.title_changed?
- post.body_changed?

Again, all of this is a result of that first line of code:

{% highlight ruby %}
    class Comment < ActiveRecord::Base
{% endhighlight %}

####Associations in ActiveRecord

The next line we come to is:

{% highlight ruby %}
      has_many :comments
{% endhighlight %}

Just like the first line, the second line results in a whole lot of new methods being generated. Here's the full list (from the [official Rails documentation](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Associations/ClassMethods.html)):

- post.comments                            
- post.comments =     
- post.comment_ids                         
- post.comment_ids =           
- post.comments <<                         
- post.comments.push                       
- post.comments.concat                     
- post.comments.build      
- post.comments.create      
- post.comments.create!     
- post.comments.size                      
- post.comments.length                     
- post.comments.count                      
- post.comments.sum        
- post.comments.empty?                     
- post.comments.clear                      
- post.comments.delete 
- post.comments.delete_all                 
- post.comments.destroy_all                
- post.comments.find              
- post.comments.exists?                    
- post.comments.uniq                      
- post.comments.reset                      

####Wrapping up

The third line of code is:

{% highlight ruby %}
    end
{% endhighlight %}
    
...which doesn't need any explanation, nor do the next three lines; they're similar to the first three.

Perhaps now you see why developers are drawn to Ruby on Rails. Once you've written a few lines of setup code, you already have a large vocabulary of methods for manipulating your data.
