---
layout: letter
title: C is for cross-site request forgery
subtitle: It's 2AM. Do you know where your cookies are?
permalink: c.html
---

####What CSRF is

Cross-site request forgery (CSRF) is when a victim is tricked into sending a malicious HTTP request from his own computer.

It's easier than it sounds. Say a person logs into Doofusbank.com. Then he clicks a link from a suspicious email, which loads a page on Evilwebsite.com, which sends a funds transfer request to Doofusbank.com. Since he's logged in, there's a risk that Doofusbank.com might accept this forged request, unless they have protection against CSRF.

####CSRF protection in Rails

CSRF is a common and well-known problem for web applications. Rails' CSRF protection is activated by placing this code in the controller: 

{% highlight ruby %}
     protect_from_forgery
{% endhighlight %}

There are three things that go into Rails' CSRF protection:

1. The hidden "authenticity_token" field
2. The "X-CSRF-Token" HTTP header
3. The token value in the session

####The hidden "authenticity_token" field

The first factor to consider is a hidden form field that Rails includes in the  [form_for](http://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActionView/Helpers/FormHelper.html#method-i-form_for) helper:

{% highlight ruby %}
      <input name="authenticity_token" type="hidden" value="l/jRTWlC4lhJg6355yj/Kqqb8u6fdHfN1ufDU+KU1I8=" />
{% endhighlight %}

This hidden field only appears for POST requests -- GET requests are not protected from CSRF.

####The "X-CSRF-Token" HTTP header

Rails can be configured to send the authenticity token in the header of every AJAX call as well. If so, the headers of your AJAX calls should contain a line that looks like this:

      X-CSRF-Token: l/jRTWlC4lhJg6355yj/Kqqb8u6fdHfN1ufDU+KU1I8=

####The session

Whether the token comes from the hidden field or the header, it has to match the token in the user's _session_ in order to pass CSRF protection.

By default, Rails stores the session in a cookie. This is the fastest option, but due to the lack of encryption, it's also the least secure. If you need more security, Rails can be configured to encrypt the cookie. For even more security, you can skip the cookie altogether and store the session in the database. 

####Study Questions

1. What are the three factors in Rails CSRF?
2. Using the fastest and least secure configuration, which of the three factors are stored on the client?
3. Describe the response of a Rails server when a client submits an invalid CSRF token.
4. Explain why GET requests are not protected from CSRF.
5. CSRF is only one attack vector on the internet. Identify at least one other attack vector and how it's different from CSRF.
6. Imagine that your boss reads this and becomes terrified of CSRF. He then asks you to implement CSRF protection on his email client and cell phone. Enlighten him as to why this isn't necessary.
