---
layout: letter
title: H is for HTTP
subtitle: The basis of all web transactions
permalink: h.html
---
####Web 2.0 or 1.1?

Every time I see a person get excited about building a web application,
I get nervous. That's because the web is not an ideal software platform. It's not
feature-rich and it's dated. So what is there to be excited about?

However, a person might say...

- "What about Flash?"
- "What about Microsoft Silverlight?"
- "What about HTML5?"
- "What about Java?"

...and so on. "Aren't these all modern, feature-rich, web-based
technologies?"

The answer to each one of these is the same. Not all users have Flash
and Java installed. Not all users have the Silverlight plugin. Not all
browsers have HTML5 support. 

All of the activity in recent years has been around technologies related
to the web, not the web itself. The core of the web is HTTP, and the
latest version of HTTP was defined in 1999. That's HTTP 1.1 -- the
version we all still use.

####HTTP by example

HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol. It is made up of __requests__
from clients and __responses__ from servers. 

Here is a sample HTTP request:

{% highlight http %}
GET / HTTP/1.1
Host: www.abcsofror.com
Accept: */*
{% endhighlight %}

...and a sample response:

{% highlight http %}
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Date: Thu, 22 Nov 2012 17:17:22 GMT
Server: Apache/2.2.3 (CentOS)
Last-Modified: Thu, 23 Aug 2012 15:47:47 GMT
ETag: "11cfe4-6c66-c7eb2ec0"
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Content-Length: 27750
Connection: close
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8

<html>
    (...the index page...)
</html>
{% endhighlight %}

In this basic example, we notice the following:

1. The exchange is done entirely in plain text.
2. The amount of data added by HTTP is very low.
3. No information about the client's identity is required.
4. The server includes a unique key (ETag) for the document and a last-modified date.
5. The server includes a three-digit status code (200 OK).

The first three points show the main advantages of HTTP. The
lightweight, stateless, and open nature of HTTP makes it possible 
for even the smallest website to serve hundreds of
visitors a day from all over the globe.

The last two points show useful features of HTTP: status codes and
client-side caching.

####Status codes

Some status codes are assigned automatically by Rails:

- __200 (OK)__: _render_ was invoked.
- __302 (Redirect)__: *redirect_to* was invoked.
- __304 (Not Modified)__: The client has already cached the content.
- __500 (Server Error)__: An exception was raised inside the
  application.

You can also provide your own status code like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
  render :text => "blah", :status => 401
{% endhighlight %}

####Caching

Client-side caching for static files (such as CSS and Javascript files)
will be automatically handled by your web server (Apache or nginx) if
those files are in the _public/_ directory.

Dynamic pages can also be cached on the client-side by manually
setting an expiration date in the controller:

{% highlight ruby %}
  expires_in 1.day
{% endhighlight %}

Server-side caching is outside the scope of this guide. Please refer to
the [Rails
documentation](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/caching_with_rails.html).
