---
layout: letter
title: G is for gems
subtitle: Yes, in Ruby, the main format for packaging software is the "gem". Seriously.
permalink: g.html
---

####There's a gem for that

The Ruby community is built on the open-source philosophy. This means
the Ruby developer can freely download and re-use other developers' code
in their own projects with no fear of legal consequences. And since the
Ruby community has been around for a number of years, solutions to most
common problems are already available for download in packages called
"gems". Rails itself is packaged and distributed as several gems. 

Here are some examples of problems I've had to solve in Rails apps using gems:

- __Admin interface__: ActiveAdmin
- __Authentication__: Devise
- __Authorization__: CanCan
- __Browser testing__: Capybara
- __Fixture replacement__: FactoryGirl
- __Javascript testing__: Jasmine
- __Pagination__: WillPaginate
- __Versioning__: PaperTrail

These and many others can be found by browsing [Ruby
Toolbox](http://www.ruby-toolbox.com).

####Careful consideration

It can be very empowering to find out just what you can add to
your project by including third-party code. However, when considering
whether or not to include a gem, always ask yourself these
questions:

- **Is the gem currently being maintained?** The absence of an active developer supporting the gem is a big sign that it's going to cause
trouble for you later on.

- **How popular is the gem?** It may sound superficial, but lots of
  users means lots of testing, lots of bug reports, lots of blog posts,
etc.

- **How do you feel about the source code?** Since Ruby is an
  interpreted language, you can actually go read the source code of each
gem yourself. How would you feel if you had to make some changes, add tests,
etc.? 

- **How is the gem used?** Sometimes gems add very little to a project
  other than a spiffy API. Look for specific examples in the docs for
how the gem is used; does it mesh well with your code?

####Bundler

The way to include a gem in your project is very simple; just go to your
project's gem file (located at ./Gemfile) and add a line like this:

{% highlight ruby %}
  gem "sass"
{% endhighlight %}

...which (obviously) adds the Sass gem. If you want to require at least
version 3.0.0 (without preventing future updates), you can write:

{% highlight ruby %}
  gem "sass", ">=3.0.0"
{% endhighlight %}

Then, to install the gem, run:

    $ bundle

If Bundler isn't installed, you may have to run the following:

    $ gem install bundler

Bundler also provides some shell commands which may help:

- __bundle show _(gem)___: Show the source location of a particular gem
  in the bundle.
- __bundle install _(gem)___: Install the gems specified by the Gemfile
  or Gemfile.lock.
- __bundle update _(gem)___: Update dependencies to their latest
  version.
- __bundle open _(gem)___: Open an installed gem in the editor.
- __bundle package _(gem)___: Package the .gem files required by your application into the vendor/cache directory

The above commands (and others) can be displayed by running: 

    $ bundle --help

