---
layout: letter
title: B is for browsers
subtitle: Every user's window to your work
permalink: b.html
---

####What web browsers do

A web browser does much more than browse the web. For example, it has to:

-   follow redirects
-   encode form data to HTTP
-   send and receive cookie data
-   fetch asset files
-   apply CSS to the page
-   execute Javascript included in the page
-   send and receive data via AJAX
   
Rails provides several tools to help you make use of these widely-accepted browser features. I am going to cover the first three.

####Redirects

The most basic example is setting up redirects for the browser to follow.

    redirect_to "/my/target_page.html"

Including this line will make the browser cancel the current page and load your target page instead. This is useful when you want to prevent users from accessing certain pages unless they are logged in.

    unless current_user.present?
      redirect_to "/my/login_page.html"
    end
    
####Form data

When a user fills in a web form on your site and presses "Submit", Rails gathers this information in the _params_ object. For example, if you are setting up a comment form on a blog, you might read the params like this:

    comment_params = params[:comment]
    
It's the same whether you use a Ruby symbol or a quoted string:

    comment_params = params["comment"] # This is the same as the previous line.

Then, if you're using [ActiveRecord](/A), you can use the _new_ and _save_ methods to write this to the database:

    new_comment = Comment.new(comment_params)
    new_comment.save
    
It's that simple!
    
####Cookies

Rails also provides a way to access cookies. It's pretty obvious:

    cookies[:user_name] = "tboyd"
    
Cookies can be used in many ways to enhance the user experience. One common use for a cookie is to provide a shopping cart feature. The following shopping cart will be cleared in 1 year:

    cookies[:shopping_cart] = { :value => "1 frisbee", :expires => 1.year.from_now }

####Looking to the future

New browser features are being introduced to the web all the time. I have only covered some of the most widely-accepted ones, but there are already dozens of others to consider. A great resource to track new browser features is [CanIUse.com](http://www.caniuse.com).
